Hello everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host, Ricardo Lobs. And today I'm
joined by Doctor Rebecca Earl. She's a professor in
the Department of History at the University of Warwick.
She is a historian specializing in the history of
food and colonial and 19th century Spanish America. And
she's the author of books like Potato and Feeding
The People, the Politics of the potato. And of
course, today we're talking about the history and politics
of the potato. So Doctor Earl, welcome to the
show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
Thank you so much for inviting me.
So to introduce the topic. Tell us first a
little bit about the, let's say the origins of
the potato. So where does it come from and
when and where exactly these people start farming
it? Well, potatoes originate in the Andes in South
America and they the precise point of origin where
the very first potatoes were domesticated or cultivated or
eaten as a topic of some dispute between ethno
botanists and historical archaeologists. But for many, many thousands
of years, people all along the slopes of the
Andes have been subsisting off potatoes and actually the,
there's evidence that has been found relatively recently for
the consumption of wild potatoes as far north as
the United States, which um are on the same
long mountain chain as the Andes. So the Andes
that run all the way up from the south
of Chile through Peru through Colombia, continuing away up
into the Rockies. And so there's evidence even in
the rocky mountains that a type of wild potato
was being eaten long before um writing began to
keep track of these things. So they were very,
very ancient food stuff for people in those parts
of the world. But people outside those parts of
the world, they were totally unknown and nobody else
had ever encountered a potato.
So I would like to understand a little bit
better here. What are some of the biggest advantages
and disadvantages of potatoes as a crop? So, I
mean, how they compare, for example to other major
crops in terms of, for example, yields and providing
people with nutrients and calories.
There are superfood stuff. They are really excellent. If
what you want to do is be get is
get the most nutrients out of a set amount
of land. You'd be hard pushed to find something
better than a potato to cultivate. They're a really
great way of converting sunlight and soil into nourishment
for people. So they're a good, it's not, the
potatoes are particularly high calorie, but they're high calorific
yield that out. A small plot of ground. You
can get many more calories than if you were
growing wheat or rice or something like that. So
they're a really efficient way of cultivating a smallish
amount of ground. They're quite miserly in their use
of water compared to lots of other crops. So
you don't need to inundate them with as much
water. They contain a large number of other nutrients
which again, they produce quite densely. So they're in
material, you know, from a material perspective, there are
really, really excellent food stuff. So they have lots
going for them from that point of view. And
they're, they're quite nutritious, particularly if you can combine
them with a bit of dairy, like a bit
of yogurt or a bit of milk or buttermilk,
they make if not, maybe a complete meal, but
a really pretty well rounded nourishment
and how adaptable are potatoes to different kinds of
environments. Because of course, people started farming them in
South America. But then, and we're going to get
a little bit more into that. They spread across
Europe and other parts of the globe. But uh
and I would imagine here, of course, we're not
talking about one single type of potato, but basically
how adaptable are they as a food source?
Yeah, that's also a really good question. And so
continuing, my enthusiastic promotion of potatoes is a really
excellent food. Um I will say that potatoes are
extremely adaptable and they're adaptable. I mean, not just
because I guess they have a some botanical um
malleability which allows them to be adapted, but also
because people are very ingenious cultivators. And so we
might talk later about who it was, who spread
potatoes all about the world and how it was
that potatoes traveled from the Andes to absolutely everywhere.
But because of the ingenuity of mostly small peasant
farmers whose names have not been preserved by, by
the historical record, people learn to adapt potatoes to
a wide range of different climates. So potatoes, as
you were just saying, come originally from, from the
Andes and from a particular type of climatic um
environment, but they now grow in all kinds of
different parts of the world. So India, for example,
has become a leader in breeding potatoes that will
grow in, in subtropical conditions. So we have potatoes
that grow almost anywhere that you might wish to
grow them with maybe, you know, maybe some exceptions,
but they're really very adaptable. Mhm.
Uh So just before we get into how they
started spreading across the globe. So uh going back
to South America, what was the status of potatoes
for South American people? I mean, they were they
held in high regard because they were such a
good source of food, I guess or
not. Well, sort of yes and no. So I
guess one needs to say by whom. So from
the point of view of local communities, they were
really important. And so we have lots of good
evidence from European sources which started to write um
records using alphabetic writing of what was going on
in the Andes. Um These sources of sources start
to appear in the 15 hundreds when Europeans invaded
the Inca Empire and spread all around South America
um conquering and colonizing and also making notes and
records of what they were observing. And so we
have evidence from colonial sources, for example of rituals
and ceremonies to help protect potato crops and to
encourage potatoes to grow and to flourish that persisted
after the arrival of, of Europeans, and which show
how very very important potatoes were to local communities.
So there were potato goddesses, there were potato deities
who protected the crop and who you might try
to um to encourage to look after your potato
field. So there would there would be ceremonies that
local villages would put on to mark the planting
season to mark the harvest season, et cetera. So
they were really important and they were, they were
all kinds of ceremonial events to attempt to protect
these super important foodstuffs. So on the one hand,
locally, very, very important and with a whole pantheon
of, of religious deities who might help protect them
from the point of view of the Inca state,
which was the the state that was governing much
of, of Peru and parts of Bolivia and Ecuador
at the time that Europeans invaded in the 15
hundreds. From the point of view of this very
large uh empire, I guess we could call it
of the Incas potatoes were not particularly um glamorous
or important. The foodstuffs that were seen as really
high status was, was maize really or you know,
corn or sweet corn depending on what you want
to call it. And that was, that was a
crop that was closely linked to Inca state ritual.
And the, the ruler himself, the Inca would engage
in certain ceremonial events to mark the start of
the the harvests and or the cultivation season for
maize, for example. So maize was really important, maize.
Why was it important? It was partly because it
was made into a really important beverage, a type
of beer that had a, a sort of, well,
a a liturgical significance almost, I mean, a bit
like wine within Christian thinking, you know, wine isn't
just a beverage. It also has a religious significance
in the the mass. You know, it's part of
what becomes the body and blood of Jesus Christ.
And these this maze beer didn't have good exactly
that same status, but it had a similarly important
religious and social status. And so maize was really
what? Potatoes, not so much, you know, potatoes were
kind of like an everyday crop. People eat them,
you don't need this big ritual. So they weren't
seen as so so fancy from the point of
view of the, the Inca State but they sustained
the people and that was what most people would
have been consuming on a daily basis.
Mhm uh That's very interesting. And actually I've asked
you that question because later on, I want to
ask you another question about how during the enlightenment
and mo in modern history, people particularly in Europe
have been looking at the potato. I mean, philosophers
and politicians uh politically how people have been thinking
about. But just before that, so uh Europeans basically
invade uh South America. How do we know when
exactly did they first get in touch with this
crop? The potato and how and when they brought
it to Europe?
Well, so food historians often like to play the
game of, of finding, you know, when is the
first written reference to a potato? When do we
have the first evidence for this or that? And
so the earliest evidence that we have from European
sources for the existence of potatoes dates from the
15 thirties. So we have some examples. We have
some a couple of early examples from the 15
thirties, from what's now Colombia, some from Peru and
Ecuador. So we have some descriptions. Europeans say things
like, oh the people in this part, this part
of, of the world, they eat a, a sort
of a root, they eat a kind of root
a bit like a truffle or a bit like
it tastes a bit like a chestnut and this
is their bread this is what they eat. So
we have these European descriptions from the early 15
hundreds who it was who first took the potato
back to Europe is, is, um, that's lost to
history. There is um, in Britain where, where I,
where I live, there's um, a certain kind of
mythology around the idea that either Sir Francis Drake
or maybe Sir Walter Raleigh brought the potato back
to Europe and there's stories about, um Raleigh cultivating
the first potato, which I think is, I mean,
almost certainly totally incorrect because he didn't go anywhere
near really where uh potatoes originated before European, before
Spaniards did. So Spaniards would have had the chance
to bring them back much earlier and it would
have been Spaniards who had the opportunity to both
encounter potatoes and then take them back to Europe.
I think it was sailors. I think it was
um people, ordinary people bringing, who brought back all
kinds of different foodstuffs with them and who spread
all sorts of different things. So we know that
there were sweet potatoes, for example, growing on the
southern coast of Spain by the end of the,
the 15 hundreds. And we have evidence of potatoes
being sold in markets in Madrid in the um
turn of the from the 15 hundreds to the
16 hundreds, for example, but who it was, who
brought all these back. Those were usually things that
were considered so unimportant that no historian at the
time thought it worth recording.
And how long exactly did it take for Europeans
to include potatoes in their diet? Because, you know,
it was a new food and sometimes people are
a little bit reticent when it comes to including
new foods in their diet. So, but actually did
it take longer or not?
Well, that, so the fact that as in the
early 16 hundreds, as I was just saying, there
were um market sellers in Madrid who were selling
potatoes for people to buy starts to hint at
the fact that actually people weren't so suspicious of
these foods. There's an old story about how potatoes
spread around Europe, which um I, I think it's
completely wrong. One of the things I wanted to
show when I started researching into the history of
potatoes was how this story couldn't be right because
it really got up my nose. This story, it
seemed to me it was just completely wrong. So
the old story goes something like this. Um The
old story says when potatoes first reached Europe in
the 15 hundreds and the 16 hundreds Europeans in
general turned up their noses at the this food
stuff because it was unfamiliar. It was different. It
grew in the ground from tubers, not from seeds,
it wasn't mentioned in the Bible. So probably it
was, you know, not a food approved of by
God. It was sort of knobbly and lumpy and
looked peculiar and people were afraid of it. And
it was only in the 17 hundreds during the
enlightenment that Europeans began to eat potatoes. Why? Because
far sighted intelligent enlightened aristocrats and public spirited philosophers
began to realize that the potato was a really
great food and that it might end hunger. And
they started encouraging ordinary people to eat potatoes. And
at that point, the ordinary people who had been
refusing to eat potatoes because they weren't mentioned in
the Bible said, oh, if Frederick the great tells
us to eat them, then we'll definitely eat this.
And the rest is history, right? That's the kind
of standard story of how the potatoes, but it's
just nuts. I mean, this is not how anybody
behaves. And anyway, most of the foods that were
mentioned that, you know, that are, that were eaten
in early modern Europe aren't mentioned in the Bible.
You know, the Bible doesn't have long lists of
foods and that wasn't stopping people from eating a
lot of these other foods. So this idea of,
you know, people being hopelessly conservative and only eating
foods that their great, great ancestors had had eaten.
That just didn't make sense to me. And I
was also thinking, well, who was going to be
doing the horticultural adaptation to allow potatoes to grow
in these slightly different European climates? The very question
you were asking a moment ago, I was thinking,
who would be doing that? It's actually peasant farmers,
they're the ones who know how to adapt plants
and how to cultivate them in slightly different soils.
So I started looking for evidence who was cultivating
potatoes in early modern Europe. And the earliest examples
that I found tended to be referring to the
fact that they were being grown by small farmers.
So scientists would write about this, you know, botanists
and people who studied plants. They were the ones
who were writing down the information about potatoes because
they were the ones who were writing down anything,
right. But what they often were writing down was
to say, oh, plants seem to be being widely
cultivated in certain parts of Germany now, or these
plants are being grown in Northern Italy by small
farmers. So I would say that they spread much
more quickly than people have giving them credit for
doing. And there are reasons that we could talk
about for why that might have been the case.
And that ordinary people far from being, you know,
conservative troglodytes were actually very happy to eat new
foods we have and we'll set up in a
minute, but we have lots of evidence from, from
other foods from the Americas maize, for example, another,
you know, peculiar food unknown to Europeans. It was
being grown in the area around Venice by the
mid 15 hundreds. And people used it to make
a new kind of polenta, a food that we
often associate with Venice. Now we think of polenta
being a kind of corn meal mush. Right before,
before maize arrived, in Europe, people were making polenta,
they were making them out of millet and other
grains. They were making sort of stodgy, starchy porridge
is out of other grains. When maize arrived, people
started making their polenta out of maize. And now
it's the most typical dish from, from the Veneto.
But again, it was peasant farmers who were doing
this, they were the ones who were eating these
starchy mushes. So people were generally quite interested in
new foods if they grew well, if they um
were calorific or if they were nourishing, if they
would have put it at the time and their
other, they had other advantages as well.
So in your book, Feeding The People at a
certain point, you talk about how particularly in the
early modern era and around the time of the
enlightenment uh instead of the state just caring about
people having enough twe and the political consequences of
famine. For example, there was sort of a transformation
in the political significance of everyday eating habits. Uh
So could you tell us a little bit about
that and how that relates uh at a certain
point to the potato?
Yeah. Yeah. Thank you. Uh The, so there was
a big change in the 17 hundreds in Europe
about how political thinkers conceptualized what it meant to
govern. Well, so this was a topic, how you
governed well, was a topic that had been of
interest to people who wrote about political theory for
some time. So listeners might be familiar with people
like Machiavelli who wrote advice about how to govern.
There were people like Hobbs who wrote books with,
we wrote a book called Leviathan, that was a
sort of analysis of the state. So there were
people who were beginning to write accounts of what
it meant to govern properly and how you should
do that. So this was a sort of new
genre that was emerging. But over the course of
the, the 17 hundreds ideas about what it in
fact did mean to govern properly began to devote
more and more attention to the importance of having
a hearty, healthy robust population. This was something that
became increasingly of interest to political theorists and there
was increasing attention to what it was you needed
to do to make sure that your population was
not only large but also robust. So, I mean,
this was in the, you know, I mean, nowadays,
we might think, oh, too big a population could
be a problem. Maybe your population will be bigger
than the food supply. That that was an idea
that emerged really only at the end of the
17 hundreds. And it was a totally new idea
really at the time for much of the, the
18th century, the absolute consensus was the more the
bigger your population, the more powerful your state, you
if you had more people than in the neighboring
country, you had more people to be in the
army. You had more people to be in the
navy. You had more people to work in agriculture.
You had more people to work in the emergent
industries. You know, you would be more powerful provided
those people were healthy, right? You needed, you didn't
want a population of sickly layabouts. You wanted a
population of hard working um laborers. So how did
you accomplish this? This became a topic that became
more and more interesting to state builders over the
course of the 17 hundreds. It hadn't really been
that interesting a question to people some hundreds of
years earlier. So if you look at ideas about
how to govern properly, I mean, even in Machiavelli,
he wasn't really interested in how you make the
population hearty and robust. He was concerned about how
you made sure the population wasn't so annoyed and
disaffected and pissed off from the state that it
might rebel. And he was conscious that you needed
to have enough food to feed your army. If
you had an army, you wanted to make sure
there wasn't a famine because again, people might be
really unhappy about that. But, you know, having like
a hearty population, that wasn't his focus, but that
became more and more of a focus over the
17 hundreds. And so statesmen and political theorists began
to think, what sort of foods could we be
encouraging the population to eat. It's got to be
cheap because we're not thinking about restructuring the entire
social order so that poor people have more money.
No, no. You want to make sure that poor
people on their limited pennies could be as healthy
as possible. And potatoes were increasingly identified as an
ideal food stuff that were cheap. People could grow
them themselves. They didn't even need to buy them
whatsoever. And they would in fact allow people those
hearty peasants nourished on potatoes could then work for
somebody, a landlord growing wheat which could then be
exported to some other lesson, you know, enlightened country
that hadn't figured out how to get its population
eating potatoes. So the balance of trade would be
positive. It was, you know, part of a virtuous
circle of becoming more powerful than your neighbor. So
potatoes were the subject of an enormous promotional campaign
across Europe during the 17 hundreds for those very
reasons.
Uh So please correct me if I'm wrong. But
I guess that it was very tied to the
rise of nations as we understand them today or
not. I mean, the the idea of nation uh
and, and the nations that developed throughout particularly the
late 18th, 19th and 20th century or not. Because
I was trying to understand here if this sort
of uh transformation in terms of uh uh this
sort of ideological transformation in terms of how politically
we think about nutrition was tied to certain specific
uh political developments or if it was mostly intellectual
developments coming from thinkers and other philosophers that eventually
started paying attention into that. Uh What what, what
happened here exactly that led to this transformation.
So I think the big changes that took place
during the 17 hundreds were about how you govern
properly and what you, what's what was necessary to
have a powerful state. Absolutely, I really agree with
you. Those are strongly linked to the emergence of
of modern nation states. So I mean, the very
idea of public health in a sense, assume some
kind of concept of a public and of a
and that's in the modern period has been connected
to the idea of of a national population. So
this is the same period when states started getting
interested, I mean, in doing censuses, I just, you
know, just for the most basic level, knowing how
many people there were in France or in Britain
or in England as it would, you know, I
those those questions are all interconnected. So it's absolutely
right. It became part of what you needed to
do to be a modern state is you needed
to understand the population, you needed to, to know
who these people were and that the population was
considered to be part of the the raw material
in a way of what made a powerful state.
And so, I mean, these aren't my insights, these
are ideas that that many scholars I have commented
on. So, I mean, people like Michelle Foucault were
writing about this 50 years ago. So the view
increasingly was developing in the enlightenment that just as
a nation had natural resources that might consist of
mineral reserves or abundant water supplies or certain crops
that grew. Well, the population too was a sort
of natural resource and you needed to understand it.
And so that you needed a census because you
needed to know how large this resource was just
as you needed to know how many trees there
were in your forest. So you could think about
how you were going to be using the the
timber resources. So they're absolutely interconnected and the emergence
of of nutritional science as a branch of chemistry,
it partly came out of people being curious about
understanding foodstuffs, but often those curiosities were very explicitly
connected to a nationalist impulse to ensure that your
nation was more powerful. So explorations and like how
much food did people actually need? How much is
enough? What's, what's the kind of minimum standard that
people can survive on? Those ideas were often very
strongly linked to nationalist impulses or moments of military
expansion and involves often, you know, lots of we
could say pure science but coming out of a
of a larger nation building impulse. Yeah.
And since we're talking here about the emergence of
modernity and another aspect that came along with it
was the upward increase in in the world's population.
Were potatoes also tied to that.
Well, there certainly are scholars who argued that there
have been scholars who tried to correlate the growth
of population, whether in Europe or worldwide with increasing
cultivation of potatoes. So there's certainly scholars who've made
that claim, but there, there are a couple of
economists who did a kind of meta analysis um
of world population in which they claim that potatoes
were responsible for something like 20 5% of global
population growth since the 15 hundreds. I mean, I
I don't know if I can um endorse that
position or not, but you know, there are people
who claim that and have been claiming it for
some time. But these claims the idea that the
population is fueled by, by potatoes or the potatoes,
fuel population growth. That idea itself emerged in the
17 hundreds, which was why potatoes were being promoted
so much. So there were lots of comments of
people saying potatoes are really great crop for population
growth. If you have any doubt, look at Ireland.
So Ireland was often held up in the 18th
century as exhibit a to demonstrate how fabulous potatoes
are. And they would say, look at Ireland, people
have huge numbers of Children. They either have, you
know, 89, 10 Children, all eating potatoes, which they're
growing themselves. What is superfood stuff? You know what,
what could possibly be better? So the ability of
the potato to fuel population growth was something that
was widely claimed at the time, which was why
it was so popular with Statesmen.
And you mentioned Ireland there. And of course, we
have to talk here a little bit about one
major historical event, potato related. That was the great
famine that lasted from 1845 to 1848. So could
you tell us a little bit about that? What
happened exactly how back then the British government responded
to the famine. And I guess that also another
thing that you mentioned in one of your books
is how the government tried to discipline people into
wage labor back then. So, could you tell us
a little bit about those aspects?
Yeah. So there was a terrible blight that spread
across many parts of Europe in the 18 forties.
Um It was called the Late Blight. It's a,
it's a potato disease which is actually um on
the rise today. And as a, you know, a
source of concern to potato cultivators today, it was
absolutely devastating. It causes the potatoes to rot and
to develop a, a kind of to just collapse
into a kind of smelly rotten mush. And this,
this blight spread across Ireland in the 18 forties,
but actually a number of other European countries as
well. It was present in the low countries in
Belgium, et cetera where it caused tens of thousands
of deaths in places like Belgium. So it was
quite devastating in other parts of, of western Europe.
But in Ireland, the bla the late blight caused
maybe a million deaths of some hunger and hunger
induced diseases when the crop failed year after year.
And the reason why in Ireland, the mortality was
so horrendous. It was so much greater than mortality
in other parts of western Europe, which were also
hit by this, this crop failure was because in
Ireland, the diet of working people in the countryside
had been reduced almost entirely to potatoes. And that
was not the case in places like Belgium where
people were a, were able to eat a more
diverse diet. Why was this? Well, it was a
combination of the fact that the potato is such
a nutritious foods stuff as you were asking about
a little while ago. And the fact that the
Irish rural population had been squeezed onto tinier and
tinier plots of land as Europe, as British colonialism
advanced and more and more land was brought into
commercial crop cultivation and the size of land holdings
that peasant farmers um we're trying to live off
got smaller and smaller. But because the potato was
such a nourishing food stuff, it was, you know,
just about possible to keep body and soul together
if you had a potato patch even better if
you had maybe enough land to have a, a
cow and you could get some of that dairy
that helps complement the potato and make it a
more nourishing food stuff. So the situation was kind
of just about sustainable at a, at a level
of, you know, sort of just above total immiserate
because the potato was, was so nourishing. And because
the situation in Ireland was so fragile, but because
it was so fragile when the crop failed and
utter devastation was the consequence. So I I it
resulted in, in um the deaths of, you know,
something like one out of eight people and the
migration uh to um the breast of the British
Isles or to um across the ocean to the
United States, for example, that may be another million
people out of a population of 8 million. So
it was absolutely devastating. And it tells you something
about how important the potato had become in Ireland,
that it had this, this terrible effect. But you
were also asking about the response of the, the
the British government, which has been a topic of
much research and much um debate among Irish historians
for, for a very long time. And there's a,
a vast body of really excellent work. What seems
really clear is that the response of the government
in London to the famine was not one of
wholehearted horror and dismay. There was of course concern
and the government wasn't in, in London wasn't simply
delighted to see a terrible famine leaving leading to
such poverty. And there were efforts at famine relief
of varying sorts. But there was also a sense
that this was as 11 of um one official
put it, you know, a bit of a godsend
because terrible though it was, it was going to
like it or not. And from the point of
view of the British government, it was more like
it rather than not like it, it was going
to sweep away the old system of peasant farming
that was seen increasingly by the sort of free
marketeers in London as being an obstacle to modernity.
So the very potato that in the 17 hundreds
had been held up by Statesmen as being a
super example of a wonderful population building food was
now seen as a big impediment to modernity. So
in the, in the 17 hundreds, when potatoes were
being promoted as a source of population growth and
nat you know, national strength, people were saying potatoes
encourage population growth. They're so nourishing, they're great and
because people can cultivate them for themselves in their
own little, you know, allotment ground, they don't have
to depend on the market, they don't have to
buy them, they don't have to enter into the
capitalist world effectively and they can be self sufficient
and isn't that great. It protects people from vicissitudes
in the market. That was kind of the view
in the 17 hundreds. By the 18 hundreds, the
situation was perceived as being very different. The last
thing that you wanted, if you were somebody trying
to build a modern capitalist economic system, the last
thing you wanted was peasants who could opt out
of wage labor, which was exactly what the potato
was seen as facilitating in Ireland. So there were
various comments by treasury officials, for example, in London
during the famine saying, well, terrible thing what's happening
in Ireland, but at least it's gonna sweep away
this archaic old system of peasant farmers. And in
the future, all of these people are gonna have
to become wage laborers. They're gonna have to work
for somebody else. They're gonna have to earn a
salary and a wage and they're going to use
that wage to buy food on the market and
it's gonna bring them unwillingly into the modern world.
So this is in the long run. Really a
good thing.
Mhm. Uh Thi this is actually very interesting because
actually, as we've been talking about here since I
asked you that question about how enlightenment thinkers and
uh politicians in the modern era fought about potatoes.
I mean, there have been in across time, uh
contradictory views about the potatoes. Sometimes it's, it's been
seen as a source of nourishment other times it's
been associated with poverty. And also, I guess you
mentioned capitalism there in the, in the early days
of capitalism, um perhaps the first few socialists out
there, I guess also associated the potato to a
certain extent with uh exploitation. Uh CORRECT. So there
are some contradictory views in Europe and elsewhere about
what the potato really politically represents.
Yeah, that's absolutely right. So, for these um free
market capitalists in, in the London Treasury office, the
potato was seen as being an obstacle to a
capitalist modernity. It was a way of allowing people
to opt out of the market and to remain
self sufficient. And it was bad for, for that
reason. And there was a whole school of thought
that saw the potato as being part of a
sort of archaic peasant world that didn't really fit
with modernity or that involved people being isolated and
separated out from the modern world, not just disconnected
from waged labor, but disconnected from a kind of
political organization. It's not a coincidence that um Karl
Marx, you know, one of the great critics of
of capitalism or the great analysts as well described
peasants in France as being like potatoes in a
sack. Because for him, the peasant lifestyle prevented people
from developing associational links and developing it prevented them
from developing a sense of class identity. And so
for him, the potatoes summed that all up, right?
You know, this was a um a antimo crop
that kept people isolated. So there was that that
sort of view of the potato as well. And
you get critiques then in other words, both from
the left and from the right of the potato
is being a bad thing, other people, other leftist
critiques, if we can put it that way of
of the potato stressed that the potato actually enabled
exploitation. So there were people who looked at Ireland
before the the famine in the 18 forties and
said, how is it possible that this exploitative situation
exists? How is it possible that people are living
on these tiny crops of land? You know, just
about surviving? Um YOU know, barely able to keep
their, their, their families fed, but you know, just
about able to do that. Why is that possible
because of the potato, which is an evil food
stuff? Because it's enabling exploitation. If there weren't potatoes,
the situation wouldn't be tenable and people wouldn't put
up with this level of terrible exploitation. So there
were people who criticized potatoes for enabling um terrible
exploitation as well. So that, you know, sort of,
from every angle, people were writing about potatoes and
connecting them to this new form of economic organization
that was emerging in the 19th century. And so
potatoes were kind of surprisingly at the heart of
this debate about what, what capitalism meant to the
worker.
Yeah, I guess that potatoes were both the savior
and the scapegoat for everyone. Yes. So uh so
I have a few more questions relating to still
the history of the potato, but some broader questions
about how it relates to the politics of food
more generally and the regulation of the food market.
So does the history of the potato connect in
any way to attempts by governments to regulate the
food market? Like for example, we're seeing now with
bans on sh sugary and salty foods and to
the way certain political ideologies react to this kind
of market regulations by labeling them, for example, illiberal
or affronts to basic freedoms.
Yeah. So, I mean, right now there's, uh there's
always a backlash whenever any state tries to intervene
in public eating habits by banning sugar, that sort
of thing. There's tends to be a backlash of
people saying this is taking away our basic right
to eat terrible food. And that we should, you
know, we have a kind of, um, philosophical right
to make our own dietary choices. It's up to
us, the state should get out of it. I
mean, this, that view often coexists with the view
that other people ought to be eating better and
that, you know, I can make my own dietary
mistakes, but that other people ought to be eating
more appropriately. There tends to be support in Britain,
for example, for the view that people who are,
um, very overweight, for example, should be, you know,
obliged to lose weight before they have operations that
are paid for out of by the National Health
Service. And that, you know, they, the National Health
Service shouldn't be investing money in people who are
unhealthy through their own fault. Right? I mean, there,
so there's a certain contradictory aspect to, um, to
this public debate. But I think you're right that
we can situate these discussions about whether people should
or shouldn't eat potatoes into a longer history of
that kind of um those kinds of debates. So
the emergence in the enlightenment, that's to say during
the the 18th century of the view that people
ought to eat more potatoes because they were healthful
and nutritious and would encourage population growth. With those
those sorts of ideas which were leading these political
thinkers to encourage potatoes and make propaganda for why
potatoes were so great. Those ideas emerged kind of
simultaneously with the emergence of, of the theorization of
the free market as a good thing. So exactly
at the time that people were saying potatoes really
good food, everybody should eat more potatoes. You should
choose to eat more potatoes, it would be better
for you. You personally, you'd be a lot stronger
and healthier and happier if you just ate potatoes
and they're tasty and your kids will like them.
It would be good for the population as a
whole and our state would be stronger and we
would be more powerful. Everybody would win, right? If
everybody just chose to eat potatoes, you don't have
to be doing it out of any kind of
self sacrifice because they're so yummy. But if you
just did, everybody would win. These ideas were emerging
at exactly the same time that people like Adam
Smith were arguing that actually the state should get
out of regulating trading and markets and that people
should just be allowed to make their own financial
decisions out of the pursuing their own interests. And
they should be allowed as much as possible to
barter and truck and to exchange goods and to
engage in, in commercial activities unrestricted by the state
and looking after only their own personal interests. But
that, that would then kind of magically result in
a smoother flowing more efficient economic system overall. So
people like Adam Smith, I mean, he wasn't alone,
but people like Adam Smith argued that the more
the state tried to oblige people to trade or
not trade in particular ways, the more it was
likely to store up trouble for the future and
that people should just be allowed to organize themselves
and that would create a smoothly flowing economic system.
And I hope you can see the similarities between
that kind of economic position and the idea that
people should just choose to eat those foods, not
because they're forced to, but because it's in their
own personal interests and they're freely choosing to do
so. So potato promotion usually was in the form
of strong encouragement rather than a dick to that
you had to eat it. And I think we
can sort of trace back to that in the
17 hundreds, our sort of contradictory relationship between state
advice and our own eating habits that, you know,
we sort of feel it's our business and it's
part of our freedom the same way that we
might think, um, you know, the free market is
somehow a good thing. One might think that, you
know, the state shouldn't be managing economies too much.
It's, it might be argued by, by people who,
who support that view and that we should be
allowed to make our own decisions. But that if
everybody made their own decisions sensibly, then everything would
work out for the best. Right? And then somehow
dietary choices will naturally self organize into a good
system, just as individual, economic choices will self organize
into a good system. I mean, I think the
evidence that individual dietary choices naturally form an effective
and smooth system, I think the evidence for that
is slight. I don't think that there's a lot
of evidence that we make good dietary choices. But
those ideas emerged at the same time,
a a and actually related to that, do we
really choose what we eat? As perhaps some people
that come more from the side of this ideology
of personal responsibility and some more uh neo liberal
takes on social programs and so on would uh
claim,
well, I mean, I, so I would say that
if, um, if we were not being persuaded to
eat different things, if persuasion, if persuasion was ineffective,
no money would be spent on advertising. So, I
mean, I, I think that we're, I think we're
not the free agents of our own diets to
the extent that we might imagine they are. I
mean, I often ask my students, I teach the
history of food and I often ask them, well,
why do you choose the things that you eat?
And students will often say, oh, because I like
them, you know, these are things that are tasty
and sometimes they'll talk about cost as well. But
they, their answers usually start with because that's what
I like and then couple that to a question
about and this is, you know, and I this
these things I can afford but the extent to
which what we like is shaped by the larger
circumstances, I I think is an important topic. And
behavioral economists pay attention to that and they look
at the way in which we're incredibly persuadable. And
also I think how we, we make poor dietary
decisions, not simply because we're persuaded, but also because
we just don't have a very good mechanism for
evaluating what actually is good for us. You know,
we don't have a very good set of bio,
we're not very attuned often to what our body
is telling us anyway. But yeah, I think the
idea of choices is deeply flawed in general.
And actually, and this is something that uh many
sociologists criticize, I guess. Uh THE idea of food
choice also ties uh a lot to socio-economic status,
right? Because poor people, particularly in more developed countries
uh represent in terms of percentage. Uh uh I
mean, there are more of these people among lower,
uh, the people that are of the lower socio-economic
status than higher socio-economic status because of the foods
they can afford and basically have access to, for
example.
Yeah. Yeah. I think that's absolutely right. And so
there are all kinds of factors that push people
with less money into eating less healthy diets. So,
I mean, the cost of the food is, is
absolutely one of them. There's a question of time.
So, you know, it's all very well to say
that you can um cook a nutritious meal um
for a much, you know, for a smaller amount,
a smaller cost than it is to buy. Um,
YOU know, fast food, for example, but if you
don't have hours and hours to cook pots of
chickpeas, for example, then you, you know, you're not
going to be able to make a nutritious Chickpea
based dish. So there's a question about not just
money, poverty, but time poverty, their access to cooking
facilities at all. So people might be living in
a small flat, which actually doesn't really have proper
cooking facilities at all. You might just have a
microwave or something like that. So the technologies of
cooking are also unequally distributed. And I mean, there's
a old historical argument going, going back to the
eighties um that was first developed by, by Sydney
Mintz who wrote a wonderful classic book on the
History of Sugar in which he argued that part
of the reason that people in Britain became a
nation of sweet tea drinkers was because during the
industrial revolution, people working in textile mills or in
other industries had very little access to cooking equipment.
They had very little time and they had very
little money and boiling some water might be about
as sophisticated AAA cooking activity as you were able
to engage in. And that a cup of very,
very sweet tea, maybe with some bread that you'd
purchased in a shop spread with some very, very
sugary jam that you'd also purchased might be the
cheapest source of calories that, that you could have.
And the only thing you really were able to
prepare, you know, you didn't have an oven to
cook, nourishing, you know, stews or anything like that.
And that, that's where this taste for super sweet
tea originated. He argued. So all of those things,
you know, time money, um cooking facilities come together
to push people to eat particular foods, which they
might ultimately then come to enjoy, you know, sweet
tea might be something that people then really enjoy.
But the forces that pushed them into that dietary
choice where by, you know, by no means a
choice.
So, and this will probably be my last question
and still related to food regulations. Uh So I,
I guess that at the same time, we have
this sort of ambivalent idea or ambivalent attitude toward
food regulation because even if uh many times like
when it comes to banning sugary drinks or regulating,
get directed at Children specifically. For example, uh, many
times we might not like that kind of thing
because we associate it with paternal, with paternalism and
so on. Other times we actually like food regulation.
Like, for example, a few years ago, with the
horse meat scandal. Right.
Yeah. Like, people want the state to ensure that
the food that they're buying is, is wholesome. And
so if it turns out that there's contaminated horse
meat, this was about, yeah, 10 years ago, there
was this big scandal all through Europe, right about
where it turned out that horse meat had made
its way into all kinds of dishes that you
could buy in the chilled food section and that
the beef lasagna was actually, you know, a very
aged horse that had been shredded up. Um, SO
people feel really betrayed when the state doesn't ensure
that their food is safe. So there's an expectation
on the one hand that the state should be
regulating the food supply. And that goes way back
to ancient times when it was considered a basic
obligation of the state to regulate the safety of
the food supply. But that safety then, you know,
where that safety control of whether the food is
basically wholesome where that then edges into saying actually,
basically sugar is basically really bad for you. You
just shouldn't eat that much. That, that is seen
as being, um, you know, um, unacceptable. So, we're
quite contradictory, I think in our attitudes towards what
we want the state to be doing.
Mhm. Uh, GREAT. So, I guess this is a
good point to wrap up the interview and then
Doctor Earl just before we go, uh, I'm leaving
some links to your books in the description box
of the interview. But apart from that, would you
also like to tell people where they can find
you when your work on the internet?
Oh, my goodness. Thank you. I should anybody want
to do this? Um Where could you find me?
Yeah, I guess. Well, I can send you the
link. So I've got, I mean, you can look
at my website um or what else could you,
you can send me an email. I would be
delighted to chat with people about anything related to
potatoes or anything else to do with food if
that was of interest to you. I'm always really
happy to talk about any of this stuff to
anybody whose ear I can bend. But yeah, thanks
for giving me the opportunity to do so.
No, thank you so much for accepting the invitation.
It's been a big pleasure to talk with you.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by the N Lights
learning and development. Then differently check the website. At
N lights.com and also please consider supporting the show
on Patreon or paypal. I would also like to
give a huge thank you to my main patrons
and paypal supporters, Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick
Suno Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew
Whitten Bear. No wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors,
Philip Forrest Connolly. Then the Met Robert Wine in
NAI Z Mark Nevs calling Hol Brookfield, Governor Mikel
Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferus and H
her meal and Lain Jung Y and the Samuel
K Hes Mark Smith J. Tom Hummel s friends.
David Sloan Wilson. Ya dear, Ro Ro Diego, Jan
Punter Romani Charlotte Bli Nico Barba, Adam Hunt Pavlo
Stassi na Me, Gary G Alman Sam of Zed
YPJ Barboza Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Broner Douglas
Fry Franca, Beto Lati Cortez or Solis Scott Zachary
Fish, TD and W Daniel. Friedman, William Buckner, Paul
Giorgio, Luke Loki, Georgio Theophano, Chris Williams and Peter
W as in David Williams, the Ausa Anton Erickson
Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore
Larry Dey Junior, Old Ebon, Starry Michael Bailey. Then
spur by Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul
Barnabas Radick, Mark Kempel, Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris
Tory Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica. No week in
the Brendan Nicholas Carlson Ismael Bensley Man George Katis,
Valentine Steinman Perras, Kate Van Goler, Alexander Abert Liam
Dan Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular Jer Urla. Good
enough Gregory Hastings David Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike
Levin and Jos Net. A special thanks to my
producers is our web, Jim Frank Luca Stein, Tom
Veg and Bernard N Corti Dixon, Bendik Muller Thomas
Trumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carl, Negro, Nick
Ortiz and Nick Golden. And to my executive producers,
Matthew Lavender, Si Adrian Bogdan Knits and Rosie. Thank
you for all.